---
layout: post
title:  "The String, or There and Back Again"
date:   2020-08-13 13:12:01 +0200
categories: julialang
---

# Introduction

The `String` type in the Julia language supports the full range of Unicode
characters, which is great in practice. Other features that are important
when working with the `String` type (especially when you need performance)
are the following:
* `String` is immutable, but it is not [interned][intern] (notably `Symbol`s are
  interned and thus can be compared using `===` fast);
* taking a single character from a `String` produces a `Char`, which is a 32-bit
  value;
* Julia Base normally assumes that `String` is UTF-8 encoded which is handy
  because most likely your source is UTF-8 encoded and in general UTF-8 has
  a reasonably compact memory footprint (but `String`s that contain invalid
  encodings are allowed to be constructed, and it is possible to
  [`transcode`][transcode] strings).

While I think that the Julia manual [Section on Strings][strings] does a very
good job explaining how they work I often find that people are confused by the
consequences of UTF-8 encoding of `String` and this post is intended to cover
this ground a bit more in depth.

All what I write here was tested under Julia 1.5.

# Two types of indices for `String`


Since `String` is UTF-8 encoded one character is represented by 1, 2, 3, or 4
bytes in it, see e.g. [Wikipedia][utf8] for the details of the encoding.
In Julia you can check that indeed one code unit of `String` is one byte by
writing (I am storing the `String` in the `str` variable as we will soon use it
again):
```
julia> str = "😄 Hello! 👋"
"😄 Hello! 👋"

julia> codeunit(str)
UInt8
```

Now this string contains `10` characters, which you can check using the
`length` function:
```
julia> length(str)
10
```
but it is actually stored on more bytes, which the `ncodeunits` function tells us:
```
julia> ncodeunits(str)
16
```
The reason is that the first and last character in this string are not ASCII
(note that in UTF-8 all ASCII characters are stored on one byte), which we can
check in the following way:
```
julia> foreach(c -> println(repr(c), ":\t", ncodeunits(c)), str)
'😄':    4
' ':    1
'H':    1
'e':    1
'l':    1
'l':    1
'o':    1
'!':    1
' ':    1
'👋':    4
```

Given these observations the natural questions are:
* how to get the `i`-th code unit in the `String` (so called byte index);
* how to get the `i`-th character in the `String` (so called character index);
* is is easy to go '*There and Back Again*' between byte and character indices;
* which functions expect byte indices, which expect character indices and what
  is the cost of using these functions.

Below I try to answer these questions.

# Getting code units

Getting the `i`-th code unit is simple (but in practice rarely needed, except
if you are working with strings on low level), you just use the `codeunit`
function, e.g.:
```
julia> codeunit(str, 1)
0xf0

julia> codeunit(str, 2)
0x9f

julia> codeunit(str, 3)
0x98

julia> codeunit(str, 4)
0x84

julia> codeunit(str, 5)
0x20
```
or you can use the `codeunits` function to get them as a vector:
```
julia> codeunits(str)
16-element Base.CodeUnits{UInt8,String}:
 0xf0
 0x9f
 0x98
 0x84
 0x20
 0x48
 0x65
 0x6c
 0x6c
 0x6f
 0x21
 0x20
 0xf0
 0x9f
 0x91
 0x8b
```

# Getting characters

Now, this is more tricky:
```
julia> str[1]
'😄': Unicode U+1F604 (category So: Symbol, other)

julia> str[5]
' ': ASCII/Unicode U+0020 (category Zs: Separator, space)

julia> str[2]
ERROR: StringIndexError("😄 Hello! 👋", 2)
```
and you see that the `getindex` function in the `str[i]` syntax does not give
you the `i`-th character in the string but rather a character that starts in the
`i`-th byte index in the string (and errors if at this given byte index the
character does not start).

So how should one get the `i`-th character in the string? Use the `nextind`
function in the following way:
```
julia> str[nextind(str, 0, 1)]
'😄': Unicode U+1F604 (category So: Symbol, other)

julia> str[nextind(str, 0, 2)]
' ': ASCII/Unicode U+0020 (category Zs: Separator, space)
```
where you pass `0` as the first argument and the desired character index as a
second argument.

You might ask why this is so awkward? The reason is that computing the location
of `i`-th character in the string is expensive, so normally one should use byte
indexing. Notably, most functions working on strings take byte indices and only
one function --- `length` --- returns number of characters, all other functions
return byte indices or number of bytes (more on this below in the glossary
section).

For example (we store `loc` as we will use it later also):
```
julia> loc = findfirst(==('H'), str)
6

julia> str[loc]
'H': ASCII/Unicode U+0048 (category Lu: Letter, uppercase)
```
and this is fast.

Be warned though that when you use byte indexing you should not do arithmetics
on them (unless your string is ASCII only, which you can check using the
[`isascii`][isascii] function). For instance if you want to go back two characters from `H`
do not write:
```
julia> str[loc - 2]
ERROR: StringIndexError("😄 Hello! 👋", 4)
```
but rather write:
```
julia> str[prevind(str, loc, 2)]
'😄': Unicode U+1F604 (category So: Symbol, other)
```
and let `prevind` do the calculation of an appropriate byte index. Trying to do
arithmetics on byte indices is the most common error when working with `String`s
in Julia.

Finally it is easy to get all byte indices that point to the start of the
character in the string with the `eachindex` function:
```
julia> foreach(i -> println("$i:\t$(repr(str[i]))"),  eachindex(str))
1:  '😄'
5:  ' '
6:  'H'
7:  'e'
8:  'l'
9:  'l'
10: 'o'
11: '!'
12: ' '
13: '👋'
```

# Going there and back again between byte and character indices

If you have a byte index and want to find character index of a character that
covers this code unit then write:
```
julia> length(str, 1, loc)
3
```
Note that byte index does not have to be a valid start of a character. In this
case the index of the character that contains this index is returned:
```
julia> length(str, 1, 1)
1

julia> length(str, 1, 2)
1

julia> length(str, 1, 3)
1

julia> length(str, 1, 4)
1

julia> length(str, 1, 5)
2
```
(byte index `5` corresponds to the second character in the string)

If you have a character index and want to learn the byte index of this character
in the `String` we already know we should use the `nextind` function. For example:
```
julia> nextind(str, 0, 3)
6
```
gets you the byte index of `'H'` character in the string.

# The glossary

Below I present the list of functions available in Julia Base that work with
strings with a comment if they work with byte or character indices and
information about their time complexity for `String` type. I omit the
description what the functions do to keep the table brief and I list only the
functions that either take or return an index or byte/character number.

| Funtion         | arguments       | return value      | complexity |
|-----------------|-----------------|--------------------------------|
| `length`        | byte index      | characters        | O(n)       |
| `ncodeunits`    |                 | bytes             | O(1)       |
| `sizeof`        |                 | bytes             | O(1)       |
| `codeunit`      | byte index      |                   | O(1)       |
| `isvalid`       | byte index      |                   | O(1)       |
| `getindex`      | byte index      |                   | O(1)       |
| `SubString`     | byte index      |                   | O(1)       |
| `view`, `@view` | byte index      |                   | O(1)       |
| `unsafe_string` | byte index      |                   | O(1)       |
| `match`         | byte index      |                   | O(n)       |
| `findfirst`     |                 | byte index        | O(n)       |
| `findlast`      |                 | byte index        | O(n)       |
| `findnext`      |                 | byte index        | O(n)       |
| `findprev`      |                 | byte index        | O(n)       |
| `firstindex`    |                 | byte index        | O(1)       |
| `lastindex`     |                 | byte index        | O(1)       |
| `thisind`       | byte index      | byte index        | O(1)       |
| `prevind`       | `i`: byte index, `n`: characters | byte index | O(n) |
| `nextind`       | `i`: byte index, `n`: characters | byte index | O(n) |
| `chop`          | character index |                   | O(n)       |
| `first`         | character index |                   | O(n)       |
| `last`          | character index |                   | O(n)       |
| `lpad`          | characters      |                   | O(n)       |
| `rpad`          | characters      |                   | O(n)       |
| `textwidth`     |                 | screen characters | O(n)       |

(note that `nextind` and `prevind` are `O(n)` for `n`, but for `i` they are
`O(1)` as UTF-8 is self-synchronizing)

# Conclusions

I must admit that working with the `String` type can be sometimes tricky, but I
hope that the summary I have presented in this post will help you easier
navigate through the options.

Finally `String` is not the only string type available in the Julia language.
Actually most functions just work with any `AbstractString` and there are
alternative string types developed in the community, you can check them out
for example [here][juliastrings].

[intern]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/String_interning
[strings]: https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/manual/strings/
[utf8]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UTF-8
[transcode]: https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/base/strings/#Base.transcode
[isascii]: https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/base/strings/#Base.isascii
[juliastrings]: https://github.com/JuliaString
