---
layout: post
title:  "Clip your data with ClipData.jl"
date:   2021-11-26 16:12:41 +0200
categories: julialang
---

# Introduction

Occasionally I write posts about Julia tools that are often not commonly
known, but are useful in practice. Today I want to talk about
the [ClipData.jl][cd] package.

The post was written under Julia 1.6.3, DataFrames.jl 1.2.2, and
ClipData.jl 0.2.1.

# What is ClipData.jl?

The package does one thing and does it well: it allows you to move
tabular data between your Julia session and the system clipboard both ways.

The to major use cases are:
1. You have a table in e.g. Google Sheet, you copy it to the system clipboard,
   and want to interactively ingest it in the Julia session as a table
   (in my examples I will use `DataFrame`).
2. You have a `DataFrame` in your Julia session and you want to copy it to the
   system clipboard so that you can later paste it in e.g. Google Sheet.

Many data scientists need to do both operations virtually every day, and
[ClipData.jl][cd] comes to the rescue. This package is not only nice, but it
has an excellent visuals explaining how things work. Therefore, since they are
MIT licensed, I just link to the videos prepared by Peter Deffebach here.
Let us get to action.

First you need to know if your data has a header of not. If it has a
header we will work with a `DataFrame`, if it does not we will work with a
`Matrix`.

### Clipping tables

To work with tabular data (having a header) use the `cliptable` function. To
copy data from the system clipboard and store it in a `DataFrame` called `df`
just write:

```
df = cliptable() |> DataFrame
```

On the other hand if you want to copy your `df` data frame to the system
clipboard use:

```
cliptable(df)
```

All this is very nicely presented in the following video (in particular notice
that column element types are automatically detected):

<div class="container">
  <div class="video">
    <video width="100%" muted controls>
      <source src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/711879/116339390-f44a9080-a7a2-11eb-9e3b-9d4716747bd1.mp4" type="video/mp4">
      Your browser does not support the video tag.
    </video>
  </div>
</div>

### Clipping matrices

To work with arrays use the `cliparray` function. To copy data from
system clipboard and store it in a `Matrix` called `mat` just write:

```
mat = cliparray()
```

On the other hand if you want to copy your `mat` matrix to system clipboard
use:

```
cliparray(mat)
```

Here is a video showing the process:

<div class="container">
  <div class="video">
    <video width="100%" muted controls>
      <source src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/711879/116340294-8c954500-a7a4-11eb-9159-cc9dc3fda80a.mp4" type="video/mp4">
      Your browser does not support the video tag.
    </video>
  </div>
</div>

# Conclusions

There are several additional features that ClipData.jl provides (like handling
how table cells should be parsed). If you want to know more details please
refer to the [ClipData.jl][cd] homepage.

I am sure you will find this little package quite useful in your data science
projects!

[df]: https://github.com/JuliaData/DataFrames.jl
[cd]: https://github.com/pdeffebach/ClipData.jl
