---
layout: post
title:  "Confused by Julia"
date:   2022-03-04 10:35:23 +0200
categories: julialang
---

# Introduction

Recently, I was confused by how Julia parser works and complained on Julia Slack
about it (in a moment I will explain what confused me). Then I learned Miguel
Raz Guzmán Macedo has a [very nice post][wat] about surprising behaviors of
Julia, so today I thought to promote Miguel's blog :).

In my post, not to steal all the fun you will have when reading
[Miguel's blog][wat], I will write about Julia's behavior that surprised me
and three behaviors, related to operator precedence, that commonly lead to bugs.

The post was written under Julia 1.7.

# What surprised me

The behavior of Julia that caught me off guard is:

```
julia> -a = 10
- (generic function with 1 method)
```

As you can see, by accident instead of writing `-a == 10` I have written
`-a = 10`.
In consequence instead of doing an equality test we have defined a new function
for the `-` operator in module `Main` overshadowing the `-` definition from the
`Base` module, as you can see here:

```
julia> -(50)
10

julia> 1 - 2
ERROR: MethodError: no method matching -(::Int64, ::Int64)
You may have intended to import Base.:-
Closest candidates are:
  -(::Any) at REPL[1]:1
```

The reason of this behavior is that for Julia's parser writing `-a = 10` means
the same as writing `-(a) = 10`, which, can be recognized as a one-line
function definition syntax.

Why is this behavior problematic? Once you have defined a new function for `-`
in `Main` you have two options. Either restart your REPL or do `- = Base.:-` to
bind `Base.:-` with `-` defined in `Main` (I would recommend restarting
REPL instead of doing the work-around).

# Operator precedence corner cases

Here are three cases of operator precedence surprises in Julia.

#### Scenario 1: `&` and `|`

When you write:

```
julia> 1 == 3 & 1 == 1
true
```

instead of expected `false` you get `true`. The reason is that you probably
thought that the parser will interpret your expression as:

```
julia> (1 == 3) & (1 == 1)
false
```

While Julia interprets it as:

```
julia> 1 == (3 & 1) == 1
true
```

#### Scenario 2: ranges

When you write:

```
julia> 1:2 .+ 3
1:5
```

you might have expected:

```
julia> (1:2) .+ 3
4:5

```

but actually this is interpreted as:

```
julia> 1:(2 + 3)
1:5
```

#### Scenario 3: pairs and anonymous functions

When you write:

```
julia> :a => x -> x => :b
:a => var"#1#2"()
```

you probably expect:

```
julia> :a => (x -> x) => :b
:a => (var"#3#4"() => :b)
```

but in reality you get:

```
julia> :a => (x -> x => :b)
:a => var"#5#6"()
```

The last scenario is relevant in DataFrames.jl, where we often use syntax:

```
source_column => (x -> some_anonymous_function_body) => target_column_name
```

# Conclusions

As any programming language Julia has some syntax corner cases that can be
surprising. The problems with operator precedence I have listed in this post
have a simple practical solution: if you are unsure about operator precedence
be explicit and use parentheses to clearly signal how you want your expression
to be evaluated.

[wat]: https://miguelraz.github.io/blog/juliawats/
