---
layout: post
title:  "Ref ref."
date:   2023-04-28 06:12:34 +0200
categories: julialang
---

# Introduction

Today I want to discuss the `Ref` type defined in Base Julia.
The reason is that it is often used in practice, but it is not immediately
obvious what the design behind `Ref` is.

I will focus on an entry-level introduction to the topic and leave out
more advanced issues that are typically not needed when working with
Julia.

This post is written under Julia 1.9.0-rc2.

# Where can you see `Ref`?

As a normal Julia user there are two cases, where you might encounter `Ref`:
broadcasting and allowing mutation.

#### Broadcasting

The first case is in broadcasting when you want to store some object in a
0-dimensional container that protects its contents from being broadcasted over.
Here is a typical example:

```
julia> x = [1, 2, 3]
3-element Vector{Int64}:
 1
 2
 3

julia> y = [2, 3, 4]
3-element Vector{Int64}:
 2
 3
 4

julia> Ref(x) .* y
3-element Vector{Vector{Int64}}:
 [2, 4, 6]
 [3, 6, 9]
 [4, 8, 12]
```

Note that I wrap `x` in `Ref` to ensure that the whole `x` vector is multiplied
by elements of `y`. If I omitted `Ref` I would get an elementwise product of
`x` and `y`:

```
julia> x .* y
3-element Vector{Int64}:
  2
  6
 12
```

The reason why `Ref` is used in such cases is that `Ref` makes a minimal impact on
the type of the result of the broadcasted operation. Consider this example:

```
julia> z = (2, 3, 4)
(2, 3, 4)

julia> [x] .* z
3-element Vector{Vector{Int64}}:
 [2, 4, 6]
 [3, 6, 9]
 [4, 8, 12]

julia> Ref(x) .* z
([2, 4, 6], [3, 6, 9], [4, 8, 12])
```

Here I protected `x` when multiplying it by elements of the tuple `z`.
I could protect `x` by wrapping it with a vector, but, as you can see
then the result of the operation would be vector of vectors. While
wrapping `x` in `Ref` produces a tuple of vectors as a result.
As you can see, using `Ref` made broadcasting mechanism use the type of
the other container to determine the output type, which is typically desirable.

#### Allowing mutation

The other use of `Ref` is when we have an immutable type that we want to be able
to mutate 😄. This might sound strange, but sometimes indeed it is useful.

Let me give you a simple example:

```
julia> struct X
           value::Int
           callcount::Base.RefValue{Int}

           X(x) = new(Int(x), Ref(0))
       end

julia> f(x::X) = (x.callcount[] += 1; x)
f (generic function with 1 method)

julia> x = X(10)
X(10, Base.RefValue{Int64}(0))

julia> f(x)
X(10, Base.RefValue{Int64}(1))

julia> f(x)
X(10, Base.RefValue{Int64}(2))

julia> f(x)
X(10, Base.RefValue{Int64}(3))
```

Here I defined the `X` type that stores a value, which I want to be immutable,
and an extra field `callcount` that counts how many times the function `f` was
called on this object. Since `Int` is immutable, I needed to wrap it with `Ref`
to achieve the mutability of this field.

As a side note this is not the only way to get this kind of effect. For example,
I could define a `mutable struct` with `const` field `value`. Still in some
cases `Ref` is a useful because it is mutable. Note that I accessed and updated
the value stored in `Ref` using empty indexing `x.callcount[]` (i.e. brackets
with no value inside them).

# So what is hard about `Ref`?

In the last example I said I am talking about `Ref`, but in the definition of
the `X` type I used `callcount::Base.RefValue{Int}` instead. This is the tricky
part. `Ref` is a parametric abstract type. This means that no object can have
`Ref` type. `Ref` is a non-leaf node in the type tree in Julia. Let us check its
subtypes:

```
julia> subtypes(Ref)
6-element Vector{Any}:
 Base.CFunction
 Base.RefArray
 Base.RefValue
 Core.Compiler.RefValue
 Core.LLVMPtr
 Ptr
```

As you can see there are six types that are subtypes of `Ref`. And here comes
why I have said that I want our post today to be entry-level. I will only talk
about `RefValue` and `RefArray`. I leave out other options as they are
rarely needed (unless you are doing low-level stuff in Julia, but then probably
you do not need to read this post 😄).

The tricky thing is that when we write `Ref(1)` we do not get an object
whose type is `Ref`, but instead a `RefValue` (that is a subtype of `Ref`):

```
julia> v1 = Ref(1)
Base.RefValue{Int64}(1)

julia> v1[]
1
```

Similarly we can have a reference to an element of an array. In this case
we pass an array as a first argument to `Ref` and an index as a second one:

```
julia> v2 = Ref([2, 3, 4], 2)
Base.RefArray{Int64, Vector{Int64}, Nothing}([2, 3, 4], 2, nothing)

julia> v2[]
3
```

You can think of `Ref` as a convenient way to handle both cases (wrapping a value
and wrapping an element of an array) in a single syntax.

There is one difference between `RefValue` and `RefArray` though. `RefValue`
indeed guarantees mutability of the container as we have seen in the example
above with the `X` struct. Trying to mutate `RefArray` will try to mutate
the underlying array. Therefore the following code fails:

```
julia> v3 = Ref(2:4, 2)
Base.RefArray{Int64, UnitRange{Int64}, Nothing}(2:4, 2, nothing)

julia> v3[] = 10
ERROR: CanonicalIndexError: setindex! not defined for UnitRange{Int64}
```

While this code works:

```
julia> a = [2, 3, 4]
3-element Vector{Int64}:
 2
 3
 4

julia> v4 = Ref(a, 2)
Base.RefArray{Int64, Vector{Int64}, Nothing}([2, 3, 4], 2, nothing)

julia> v4[]
3

julia> v4[] = 100
100

julia> v4
Base.RefArray{Int64, Vector{Int64}, Nothing}([2, 100, 4], 2, nothing)

julia> a
3-element Vector{Int64}:
   2
 100
   4
```

and we can see that the `a` array was changed.

# Conclusions

The major things to remember about `Ref` are:

* Its main uses are in broadcasting and when we need a lightweight mutable container.
* `Ref` is abstract, when you write `Ref(x)` you do not get a `Ref` instance. Instead
  you will get a `RefValue` (which is mutable).
* There are other subtypes of `Ref` than just `RefValue`. You will rarely need them.
  Of the other options the one you might want to use most often is `RefArray`, which
  creates a reference to a single element of the underlying array.

I hope you found this post a useful ref. for `Ref`.
