---
layout: post
title:  "Evolution of DataFrames.jl load time"
date:   2023-12-29 10:13:42 +0200
categories: julialang
---

# Introduction

Julia 1.10 has just been released. You can find a summary
of the improvements in [this post][julia]. Seeing the release
I was curious how the [DataFrames.jl][df] load time changed in it.

In this post I want to show you how long it takes to install
and to load DataFrames.jl.

# Experiment setup

The tests were performed on a laptop with i7-1250U processor, 16 GB of RAM and under Windows 11 Pro.

I tested the following Julia versions: 1.6.7, 1.7.3, 1.8.5, 1.9.4, 1.10.0 (the current release),
and additionally the latest development version 1.11.0-DEV.1165.

For all setups I have cleaned all Julia temporary files and performed two operations:

* installation fo DataFrames.jl using `using Pkg; Pkg.add("DataFrames")` operation; here I collected the reported total precompilation time;
* loading DataFrames.jl using `@time using DataFrames` as the only operation in a fresh Julia session; here I recorded load time and memory used.

The version of DataFrames.jl used in tests is 1.6.1.

# Experiment results

I have collected the results of my test in the following table:

| Version             | `Pkg.add("DataFrames")` | `@time using DataFrames`                 |
|---------------------|-------------------------|------------------------------------------|
| 1.6.7               | 55 s.                   | 1.19 s., 2.64 M allocations: 190 MiB     |
| 1.7.3               | 44 s.                   | 1.20 s., 2.63 M allocations: 187 MiB     |
| 1.8.5               | 43 s.                   | 2.04 s., 4.76 M allocations: 338 MiB     |
| 1.9.4               | 79 s.                   | 1.23 s., 1.55 M allocations:  92 MiB     |
| **1.10.0**          | **60 s.**               | **0.79 s.,  579 k allocations:  44 MiB** |
| 1.11.0-DEV.1165     | 72 s.                   | 0.54 s.,  542 k allocations: 35 MiB      |

# Conclusions

The major things that we can conclude are the following:

* If we excluded Julia 1.8 the load time of DataFrames.jl constantly goes down with newer versions; the same applies to memory usage.
* The precompilation time increases; in gereral you have to wait for around one minute to get all dependencies of DataFrames.jl compiled. Fortunately this is a one time cost.

In summary: Julia 1.10 brings a significant decrease of DataFrames.jl load time. Also we can see that the upcoming Julia 1.11 can be expected to be even faster. This is great news.

Happy New Year!

[julia]: https://julialang.org/blog/2023/12/julia-1.10-highlights/
[df]: https://github.com/JuliaData/DataFrames.jl
